---
title: Go Static
date: 2016-10-24 00:31 UTC
author: Paul Scarrone
category: development
tags: web development, business
---

I started working with the web in the 90's but abandoned it early on due to the lack of sanity in its features. If I wanted to make something beautiful IE(Internet Exploder for the kiddies) found a way complicate the matter that I would give the project up or it would digress into something that merely worked. I went back to the desktop platform where things made sense. There were still the problems of Cross Platform but at least the expectation on desktop was your users would respect your platform selection. Strangely enough it was easy to get the end-user to download the application for the right platform but telling them not to us IE was some kind of insurmountable task.

Around 2004 I returned to the web to a world of Wordpress and Drupal and the burning need for every living soul to operate a CMS and Blog. If you ask someone successful with their blog I bet you they will tell you one of the secrets is consistency and discipline. When speaking with customers I would liken a blog to a TV series. People kind of expect it to have a regular schedule. Such was the lure of CMS(Content Management Software) the illusion that the end user could manage their entire website without the need of a web developer. A fool paradise, but it was a profitable paradise for a while.

##### The Problem

Once I had given my obligatory speech about personal responsibility and how it was important for to take the new website for regular walks. I would give my customer one last chance to give up the idea of a CMS and charge them around $7,000-$10,000 dollars to produce a site that was not only lovely but jam packed with features that would last until they decided to hit the upgrade button. It was a fire and forget strategy after all. The huge price tag and all the features were supposed to keep running for 10 years without much costly maintenance from me the developer.

The reality of course was turning someone loose in a fully stocked wood-shop. The tools were there but the skills were not present. New pages with different font sizes and color. Sometimes pages that were just constantly appended to so they continued to scroll on forever. Think of a house and as time passed each owner added an addition. Some will be better than others but none of them actually look like they belong on the original house.

##### The Solution

If you have all of the money or you work in a large enterprise that doesn't have its own digital marketing team go with Wordpress or Drupal and pay someone on retainer to maintain its vision while educating your content creators.

For the rest of us I have two words <b>Static Website</b>. What you may not have realized is that most websites don't need a login section or a forum. These days I can host a static site from $5/mo to free and take a fraction of the time to build. It seems like a very 1990's solution but I promise you the way that we consume the web today is far more conducive to simple static websites than you might think. Let list out the needs you might have:

- &#10003; Blog/News
- &#10003; Contact Information
- &#10003; Store Hours
- &#10003; About / Product Pages

The blog may appear more complicated but in reality each blog post is just its own page. If your developer is using something clever like <b>[Middleman](https://middlemanapp.com)</b> then deploying a new blog post can take a little as 15 minutes.

The HTML5 semantic elements have made short work of the rest of our requirements. 

- <b>&lt;tel&gt;</b> has taken care of how we share phone numbers
- The <b>mailto:</b> protocol is a very safe alternative to a contact form
- Services like <b>[SavvyMailer](http://localhost:4567/#products)</b> can give you a contact form for a low yearly cost if desired.

Lets talk costs; In the 90's $5000-$8000 was the normal cost of a "Business Website" in a CMS. The same content could be completed for around $1000 with a static site using a framework like Middleman. Lets assume that you listen to your digital marketing strategy and produce a News/Blog article every week. Thats 52 publications a year each talking around 15 minutes of billable effort which would come to about 13 hours a year of effort. Lets assume the developer you selected is overcharging you like crazy and billing at $125/hr. You have spent 1625 a year in updates. Whats great about this well you still have $2375 left in your bank and your website still looks as good if not better than the day it was launched. More realistically you should be paying half of that per year.

If I can throw an analogy on this a website is not a house. It replaced brick and mortar so don't stick it in that slot. A website is a living thing, it has to be tended as the environment around it changes. Think of your website as a garden, you grow it and it yields business and income. A web developer is just your gardener.

But seriously, if you have $2375 left over spend it on digital marketing. A website by itself is useless unless you are promoting your brand. Marketing is hands on, cold calling, mailers, promoted social media posts. You have to put something in to get something back.
